At the time that you started working in computer music,
most computer usage was for purposes
like accounting and ballistics calculations.
What made you even think of using computers
as a creative tool?
I had come to Stanford in 1962 from three years
studying in Paris with Nadia Boulanger, who
was a well-known teacher and people such as Aaron Copland.
Quincy Jones and I were there at the same time studying.
So she was an important figure in Paris, musical circles.
But as important to my own education as Nadia Boulanger
was the musical scene in general in Paris,
Pierre Boulez was a young avant-garde enfant terrible,
often referred to in such a way, in Paris
and had a series of concerts, the Domaine Musical,
in which he presented new music, much of which
had to do with loudspeakers, electronic music,
made by the various kinds of devices
that one found in radio studios broadcasting in those days,
oscillators, filters, things that could be turned
to musical uses by composers if given the opportunity
to work in some of these studios.
So when I came to Stanford, having had this rich experience
in Europe, I, as a graduate student,
I asked if there were possibilities for such
and there were none.
There was no studio.
There was poor electronic music, the only one
that I knew of in this country was at Columbia at that time.
In any case, my second year of graduate school,
my graduate studies with Leland Smith in composition
or not musicology is noted in the book, but rather
I'm a composer by training.
I was given an article that Max Matthews had written.
Max was a researcher at Bell Labs,
director of the Behavioral Research Lab.
And his interests not only were engineering and engineering
sciences, but also music.
And he had developed a program called
which allowed computers to be used
to generate acoustic signals.
This, of course, was of interest in the scientific community
for speech research, but Max's interests were in music.
And he wrote this article published in Science
and in November 1963 describing this program.
So that was the beginning.
Now in the very beginning of electronic music,
the electronics we're talking about were actually analog.
By the timing of your start in the electronic music field,
you managed to get in on the ground floor
of digital electronic music.
In the very beginning, access to computers
must have been a very big problem.
Well, it was.
But Stanford had a kind of open view toward this
and had made an invitation to the School of Humanities
to look at computers and possible applications.
So there was a coincidence that was my good fortune, that is,
having looked at this article by Max,
also realizing that the computer science department, which
was then part of the School of Humanities and Sciences,
was open to uses other than the sort of applications
which you described at the outset.
So I met a young undergraduate, David Pool, who
was a tuba player in the orchestra, Stanford Orchestra.
I was the tympanist at the time of 30-year-old graduate student.
David was probably a 19 or 20-year-old undergraduate.
He saw me at the computer center one day
holding a big box of IBM cards, which I had acquired
from Max at Bell Labs, and asked what I was doing.
And I told him that I was going to try and implement
this program on the computer system at Stanford.
And he jumped in and offered to help me.
I think without David, I may not have been successful
in these early years because it was laborious.
It was difficult.
One had to have fairly comprehensive understanding
of how computers work.
My last math course had been in high school,
so it was a long way for me to, let's say,
would have been a bit of a stretch for me
to have accomplished this all by myself.
So David taught me basically all that I needed to know
through over the course of several years.
He got the program going, taught me how to program,
taught me the basics of acoustics, all the things
that I needed to understand in order
to begin work with the computer.
Now, it turns out that his solution
to getting continuous data stream of samples
from a big IBM 7090 to a digital analog converter,
which was actually the two ladders, the XY coordinates
of a dex scope.
This continuous data stream in order not
to have small segments of sound, but rather continuous sound,
turned out to be a solution to increasing
the number of timeshare users on this PDP-1 deck timesharing
system, which I think supported two or three users.
And David's solution to the problem of data bandwidth
and continuous samples also solved their problem
for fast swapping.
And as I remember, the number of users after he did that
went from two or three to eight or 10, something that sort.
So he became a very important part
of the artificial intelligence laboratory.
He finished his graduate work and then went on
and did some, finished his undergraduate, I'm sorry,
then did some graduate work.
But he basically became kind of the system guru
of the lab that John McCarthy directed in the early years.
When you came to Stanford then, you did not immediately
go to the AI lab.
That was subsequent in your career.
When did you go from the regular campus to the AI lab?
And given that you were a professor of music at that point,
rather than a professor of math or computer science,
what motivated you to move out there?
I was a graduate student actually until 1966
when I finished my doctorate.
But the initial work was done at the computer center on campus
on a PDP-1, which shared a 2314 disk with an IBM 7090.
And in 1966 is when the AI project acquired a PDP-6, which
was a large machine, timeshared, and moved to the DC Power
Laboratory on the Rastrodero Road.
And it was then that I started teaching as well that year.
Your move to the sale facility then out on Rastrodero Road
was motivated in large part by your desire
to have access to the computing resources there.
Did you have a lot of contact with the faculty
who were doing the more hardcore computer science research,
like robotics or formal proofs of computer programs?
Yes, I did.
I mean, it was one community of people,
some having more stature than others, I'd say.
I was not funded.
And the work that I did, and also with Leland Smith,
who joined me in this work, who had been my composition
professor then in 1966, senior colleague, we were unsupported.
So therefore, we were constrained in the hours
in which we could use the system to weekends and nights,
and I would say some very late nights.
But there was one researcher, Raj Reddy,
who went on to Carnegie Mellon, and I think
director of their robotics lab, who at that time
was working in speech recognition.
And he and I, of course, had some common interest
in that we were both interested in the acoustic domain.
So that was a rich connection.
I must say, I used the body of people at the AI lab
to my own advantage.
I was able to ask many people, many questions,
and get good, solid answers about things
that were common knowledge to those
who were educated in the sciences.
And so it was a very rich environment, from my point of view.
I think of all the people, probably David Poole
was the most important, but in my own particular work,
because he wrote a special compiler that
was native to the PDP6, PDP10 family of computers.
And in doing that, he taught me programming and assembly
language, whatnot, and sort of shepherded me
through the life at the AI lab, protecting me
from occasionally arrogant scientists who would have
liked less competition for compute cycles.
But in general, it was a pretty nice environment
and supportive, I would say.
